[doc] Expand and enhance the tutorials (#1692)
eth-cscs/reframe: docs/tutorial_advanced.rst

=================================================
Tutorial 2: Customizing Further a Regression Test
=================================================

In this tutorial we will present common patterns that can come up when writing regression tests with ReFrame.
All examples use the configuration file presented in :doc:`tutorial_basics`, which you can find in ``tutorials/config/settings.py``.
We also assume that the reader is already familiar with the concepts presented in the basic tutorial.
Finally, to avoid specifying the tutorial configuration file each time, make sure to export it here:

.. code:: bash

   export RFM_CONFIG_FILE=$(pwd)/tutorials/config/mysettings.py

Parameterizing a Regression Test
--------------------------------

> We have briefly looked into parameterized tests in :doc:`tutorial_basics` where we parameterized the "Hello, World!" test based on the program language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have briefly looked into parameterized tests in :doc:`tutorial_basics` where we parameterized the "Hello, World!" test based on the programming language.
```

Test parameterization in ReFrame is quite powerful since it allows you to create a multitude of similar tests automatically.

> In this example, we will parameterize the last version of the STREAM test from the :doc:`tutorial_basics` by changing the array size, so as to check bandwidth of the different cache levels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we will parameterize the last version of the STREAM test from the :doc:`tutorial_basics` by changing the array size, so as to check the bandwidth of the different cache levels.
```

Here is the adapted code with the relevant parts highlighted (for simplicity, we are interested only in the "Triad" benchmark):

.. literalinclude:: ../tutorials/advanced/parameterized/stream.py
   :lines: 6-
   :emphasize-lines: 5,7-10,18-19

> A parameterized test needs to be decorated with the :func:`@parameterized_test <reframe.core.decorators.parameterized_test>` decorator and has its constructor accepting a set of parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A parameterized test needs to be decorated with the :func:`@parameterized_test <reframe.core.decorators.parameterized_test>` decorator and define its constructor to accept a set of parameters.
```

Author: I changed that a bit.

.. literalinclude:: ../tutorials/advanced/jobopts/eatmemory.py
   :lines: 26-38
   :emphasize-lines: 11-13

The extra resources that the test needs to obtain through its scheduler are specified in the :attr:`extra_resources <reframe.core.pipeline.RegressionTest.extra_resources>` attribute, which is a dictionary with the resource names as its keys and another dictionary assigning values to the resource placeholders as its values.
As you can see, this syntax is completely scheduler-agnostic.
If the requested resource is not defined for the current partition, it will be simply ignored.

You can now run and verify that the generated job script contains the ``--mem`` option:

.. code-block:: none

  ./bin/reframe -c tutorials/advanced/jobopts/eatmemory.py -n MemoryLimitWithResourcesTest -r
  cat output/daint/gpu/gnu/MemoryLimitWithResourcesTest/rfm_MemoryLimitWithResourcesTest_job.sh

Modifying the parallel launcher command
=======================================

Another relatively common need is to modify the parallel launcher command.
ReFrame gives the ability to do that and we will see some examples in this section.

> The most common case is to pass arguments to the launcher command that you cannot pass them as job options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that you cannot normally pass as job options.
```

For example, in order to debug a parallel program with `ARM DDT <https://www.arm.com/products/development-tools/server-and-hpc/forge/ddt>`__, you would need to invoke the program like this: ``ddt [OPTIONS] srun [OPTIONS]``.
ReFrame allows you to wrap the launcher command without the test needing to know which is the actual parallel launcher command for the current partition.
This can be achieved with the following pipeline hook:

.. code:: python

   from reframe.core.launchers import LauncherWrapper

   class DebuggerTest(rfm.RunOnlyRegressionTest):
       def __init__(self):
           ...

       @rfm.run_before('run')
       def set_launcher(self):
           self.job.launcher = LauncherWrapper(self.job.launcher, 'ddt',
                                               ['--offline'])

The :class:`LauncherWrapper <reframe.core.launchers.LauncherWrapper>` is a pseudo-launcher that wraps another one and allows you to prepend anything to it.
In this case the resulting parallel launch command, if the current partition uses native Slurm, will be ``ddt --offline srun [OPTIONS]``.

> - Replacing the launcher

Reviewer 2: remove this line ?

#. the options to be passed to the executable as specified in the :attr:`executable_opts <reframe.core.pipeline.RegressionTest.executable_opts>` attribute.

Adding job scheduler options per test
=====================================

Sometimes a test needs to pass additional job scheduler options to the automatically generated job script.
This is fairly easy to achieve with ReFrame.
In the following test we want to test whether the ``--mem`` option of Slurm works as expected.

> We compiled and run a program that consumes all the available memory of the node, but we want to restrict the available memory with the ``--mem`` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We compiled and ran a program that consumes all the available memory of the node, but we want to restrict the available memory with the ``--mem`` option.
```

Examples are `ipyparallel <https://ipyparallel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__, the `GREASY <https://github.com/BSC-Support-Team/GREASY>`__ high-throughput scheduler, as well as some visualization software.
The trick here is to replace the parallel launcher with the local one, which practically does not emit any launch command, and by now you should almost be able to do it all by yourself:

.. code:: python

   import reframe as rfm
   from reframe.core.backends import getlauncher

   class CustomLauncherTest(rfm.RunOnlyRegressionTest):
       def __init__(self):
           ...
           self.executable = 'custom_scheduler'
           self.executable_opts = [...]

       @rfm.run_before('run')
       def replace_launcher(self):
           self.job.launcher = getlauncher('local')()

The :func:`getlauncher <reframe.core.backends.getlauncher>` function takes the `registered <config_reference.html#systems-.partitions-.launcher>`__ name of a launcher and returns the class that implements it.
You then instantiate the launcher and assign to the :attr:`launcher` attribute of the job descriptor.

> 

Reviewer: Delete these empty lines

Author: Just one of them.

   :lines: 6-
   :emphasize-lines: 17-23

The additional parallel launch commands are inserted in either the :attr:`prerun_cmds` or :attr:`postrun_cmds` lists.
To retrieve the actual parallel launch command for the current partition that the test is running on, you can use the :func:`run_command <reframe.core.launchers.Launcher.run_command>` method of the launcher object.
Let's see how the generated job script looks like:

.. code-block:: none

   ./bin/reframe -c tutorials/advanced/multilaunch/multilaunch.py -r
   cat output/daint/gpu/cray/MultiLaunchTest/rfm_MultiLaunchTest_job.sh

.. code:: bash

    #!/bin/bash
    #SBATCH --job-name="rfm_MultiLaunchTest_job"
    #SBATCH --ntasks=4
    #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1
    #SBATCH --output=rfm_MultiLaunchTest_job.out
    #SBATCH --error=rfm_MultiLaunchTest_job.err
    #SBATCH --time=0:10:0
    #SBATCH -A csstaff
    #SBATCH --constraint=gpu
    module load PrgEnv-cray
    srun -n 1 hostname
    srun -n 2 hostname
    srun -n 3 hostname
    srun hostname

The first three ``srun`` commands are emitted through the :attr:`prerun_cmds` whereas the last one comes from the test's :attr:`executable` attribute.

> Flexible Regression Tests

Reviewer: Maybe add also here that flexible tests should run with the serial execution policy.
